---
title: Proclamation No. 16/1996
---

# Flag and Emblem Proclamation

WHEREAS, sub-Articles (1) and (2) of Article 3 of the Constitution stipulate on the Flag and Emblem of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia;

WHEREAS, in consequence thereof, it is found necessary to promulgate a law providing for particulars on the Flag and the Emblem;

NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:

#### 1. Short Title

This Proclamation may be cited as the "Flag and Emblem Proclamation No 16/1996."

#### 2. Symbolism of the Flag

The Flag of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (hereinafter "the Flag") symbolizes the sovereignty of the Republic and the unity of its peoples founded upon their common will.

#### 3. Colours and Shape of the Flag

    1) The Flag shall have the colors: green at the top, yellow at the middle and red at the bottom.
    2) The colors shall be bright and basic.
    3) The colors shall be structured horizontally and be of the same size. The length of the Flag shall be twice its width.
    4) The Emblem shall be a blue circle with depictions:
        (a) straight and equal lines of yellow that come from all directions and join each other;
        (b) a star formed by the straight and equal lines;
        (c) yellow rays radiating from the joints of the straight and equal lines.

#### 4. Meaning of the Colours of the Flag

The colors of the Flag shall represent the following meanings:
    1) the green for labour, fertility and development;
    2) the yellow for hope, justice and equality; and
    3) the red for sacrifice and heroism towards the prevalence of freedom and equality.
    4) the circular blue background of the Emblem signifies peace.

#### 5. Meaning of the Emblem

    1) the Straight and Equal Lines: signify the equality of Nations, Nationalities and Peoples as well as of Religions.
    2) the Star formed by the Straight and Equal Lines: signifies the unity founded by the Nations, Nationalities and Peoples of Ethiopia of their common will.
    3) the Yellow Rays: signify the bright prospect in sight for the Nations, Nationalities and Peoples united of their common will.

#### 6. Pictorial Representation of the Flag

The pictorial representation of the Flag is as follows:

#### 7. Display of the Flag

Except in cases of force majeure obstructive to having it flown:
    1) The Flag shall fly daily at the offices of the house of Peoples' Representatives, of the Council of Ministers, of regional organs of power at every level, of ministries, of other executive organs, of courts, of schools, of military establishments, of police and border-guard establishments and at the embassies and residential buildings of Ambassadors of the Republic;
    2) Merchant ships and boats of the Republic shall fly the Flag daily;
    3) Government offices not specified in sub-Article (1) of this Article, shall fly the Flag on public holidays;
    4) The Flag shall fly at the following places:
        (a) at the square within the premises of the House of the Federation;
        (b) at the respective offices and residential buildings of the Head of State and of the Head of Government of the Republic;
        (c) on the vehicle, plane or vessel in which the Head of State, the Head of Government or the Ambassador of the Republic is traveling.

#### 8. Size of the Flag

Without prejudice to article 3 (3) of this Proclamation, the Flag shall have the following sizes:
    1) at major squares, the size of the Flag shall be 210 by 420 cms. and the flagstaff shall be from 15 to 18 metres high;
    2) at medium squares, the size of the Flag shall be 150 by 300 cms. and the flagstaff shall be from 10 to 15 metres high;
    3) at the squares of offices, higher education institutions and organizations, the size of the Flag shall be 135 by 270 cms. and the flagstaff shall be from 10 to 12 metres high;
    4) on major government buildings, the size of the Flag shall be 135 by 270 cms. and the flagstaff shall be 5 metres high;
    5) at organizations and business enterprises in the ground floors of major buildings, the size of the Flag shall be 105 by 210 cms. and the flagstaff shall be 3 metres high;
    6) on major ships and when displayed by a guard of honour in procession, the size of the flag shall be 105 by 210 cms. and the flagstaff shall be 230 cms. high;
    7) in honour of foreign guests and on public holidays, the size of the Flag flown in the streets shall be 90 by 180 cms. and the flagstaff shall be 2 metres high;
    8) on medium size ships, the size of the Flag shall be 90 by 180 cms. and the flagstaff shall be 2 metres high;
    9) on the desks of the offices of the Head of State, the Head of Government and ambassadors, the size of the Flag shall be 21 by 42 cms, and the flagstaff shall be 50 cms. high;
    10) on vehicles in which the Head of State, the Head of Government and ambassadors travel, the width and length shall be in the ratio of 3:4 and shall be 30 by 40 cms.

#### 9. Place for Setting up the Flagstaff

The Flagstaff of the Flag flown at a square shall, as far as possible, be set up at the centre in front of the office building.

#### 10. Tip of the Flagstaff

The tip of any flagstaff shall be spear-shaped.

#### 11. Time of Hoisting and Lowering the Flag

    1) Without prejudice to sub-Articles (2) and (3) of this Article, the Flag shall be hoisted at 6 a.m. and lowered at 6 p.m. at offices specified in Article 7(1) of this Proclamation and on ships and boats. However, military units in regions where a state of emergency has been declared need not comply with the regular hoisting and lowering time until the situation changes.
    2) In schools, the Flag shall be hoisted in the morning before classes begin and lowered after the day's classes end; hoisting and lowering shall take place at a procession ceremony of students.
    3) The Flag shall be hoisted on the eve and lowered on the morrow of public holidays.

#### 12. The Flag of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

The Flag of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia shall only be of the tricolours of Green, Yellow and Red, as provided hereinabove, together with the Emblem at the centre, as specified in this Proclamation.

#### 13. Any Ethiopian national

Any Ethiopian national shall have the responsibility and duty to pay due honor to the Flag of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.

#### 14. Power to Issue Regulations

The Council of Ministers may issue regulations necessary for the implementation of this Proclamation.

#### 15. Power to Issue Directives

The following may issue directives of implementation pursuant to regulations made in accordance with Article 14 of this Proclamation:
    1) the Ministry of National Defence with respect to military units;
    2) the Ministry of Transport and Communications with respect to merchant ships and boats;
    3) the Ministry of Foreign Affairs with respect to the embassies and consulates of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.

#### 16. Repeals

The following laws are hereby repealed:
    1) the Flag Proclamation No.3/ 1987; and
    2) the Emblem of the Republic Proclamation No. 4/ 1987.

#### 17. Effective Date

This Proclamation shall enter into force as of the 6th day of February, 1996.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 6th day of February, 1996.**

> ##### NEGASO GIDADA (DR.)
>
> ##### PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA