---
title: Proclamation No. 21/1996
---

# Republic of Tunisia Trade Agreement Ratification Proclamation

WHEREAS, the Transitional Government of Ethiopia and the Government of the Republic of Tunisia, inspired by the desire to promote and expand trade and thereby strengthen economic relations between the two countries on the basis of equality and mutual benefit had signed a Trade Agreement in Tunis on the 3rd day of November, 1994;

WHEREAS, it is stipulated in the Agreement that the Agreement shall formally come into force after the exchange of notes confirming its ratification in compliance with the respective legal procedures in force in each country;

WHEREAS, the House of Peoples' Representatives of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia has ratified said Agreement at its session held on the 13th day of February, 1996;

NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 sub-Articles (1) and (12) of the Constitution, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:

#### 1. Short Title

This Proclamation may be cited as the "Republic of Tunisia Trade Agreement Ratification Proclamation No. 21/1996".

#### 2. Ratification of the Agreement

The Trade Agreement signed in Tunis on the 3rd day of November, 1994 between the Transitional Government of Ethiopia and the Government of the Republic of Tunisia is ratified.

#### 3. Power of the Ministry of Trade and Industry

The Ministry of Trade and Industry is hereby empowered to implement the Agreement.

#### 4. Effective Date

This Proclamation shall enter into force as of the 13th day of February, 1996.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 13th day of February, 1996.**

> ##### NEGASO GIDADA (DR.)
>
> ##### PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA

# COUNCIL OF MINISTERS REGULATIONS No. 1/1996

# COUNCIL OF MINISTERS REGULATIONS TO PROVIDE FOR THE REGISTRATION OF SHIPS

These Regulations are issued by the Council of Minis-ters pursuant to Article 5 of the Definition of Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Proclamation No. 4/1995.

#### 1. Short Title

These Regulations may be cited as the "Registration of Ships Council of Ministers Regulations No 1/1996"

#### 2. Definition

In these Regulations the term "Ship" includes vessels as defined under Article 1 of the Maritime Code as well as ships and motor boats used for inland water transport.

#### 3. Registration

The Ministry of Transport and Communications shall carry out the registration of ships and other related activities.

#### 4. Place of Registration

Addis Ababa or other Ethiopian towns designated by the appropriate body, shall serve as a place(s) port(s) of registration.

#### 5. Effective Date

These Regulations shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Negarit Gazeta.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 13th day of February, 1996**

> ##### MELES ZENAWI
>
> ##### PRIME MINISTER OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIAx