---
title: Proclamation No. 22/1996
---

# A PROCLAMATION TO AMEND THE MINING PROCLAMATION

WHEREAS, it has become necessary to amend the
Mining Proclamation;

NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1)
of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:

#### 1. Short Title

This Proclamation may be cited as the "Mining (Amendment) Proclamation No. 22/1996."

#### 2. Amendment

The Mining Proclamation No. 52/1993 is hereby amended as follows:

    1) The clause "may acquire without cost a participation interest of up to ten percent" in the first sentence of Article 44 is hereby deleted and replaced by the clause "shall acquire without cost a participation interest of two percent."
    2) Sub-Article (1) of Article 46 is hereby deleted and replaced by the following new sub-Article (1):

    (1) The power to issue artisanal mining license and construction minerals mining license undertaken by domestic investors is vested in the Mines and Energy Bureau of National/Regional Self-Governments; while prospecting, exploration and mining licenses for all other mining operations shall be issued by the Ministry, subject to regulations approved by the Council of Ministers in respect of combined and mining licenses.

#### 3. Effective Date

This Proclamation shall enter into force as of the 15th day
of February, 1996.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 15th day of February, 1996.**

> ##### NEGASO GIDADA (DR.)
>
> ##### PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOΡΙΑ

# COUNCIL OF MINISTERS REGULATIONS NO. 2/1996

### COUNCIL OF MINISTERS REGULATIONS TO AMEND THE CUSTOMS TARIFFS REGULATIONS

These Regulations are issued by the Council of Ministers pursuant to Article 5 of the Definition of Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Proclamation No. 4/1995 and Article 4 of the International Convention on the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System Ratification Proclamation No. 67/1993.

#### 1. Short Title

These Regulations may be cited as the "Customs Tariffs Council of Ministers (Amendment) Regulations No. 2/ 1996."

#### 2. Amendment

The Customs Tariffs Classification System of Goods and Rates attached to the Customs Tariffs Regulations No. 122/1993 is hereby amended by the schedule attached hereto.

#### 3. Effective Date

These Regulations shall enter into force as of the 10th day of January, 1996.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 15th day of February, 1996.**

> ##### MELES ZENAWI
>
> ##### PRIME MINISTER OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOΡΙΑ