---
title: Proclamation No. 26/1996
---

# National Research Institute of Health Establishment Proclamation Repealing Proclamation

WHEREAS, it is found necessary to repeal the National Research Institute of Health Establishment Proclamation No. 271/1985;

NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:

#### 1. Short Title

This Proclamation may be cited as the "National Research Institute of Health Establishment Proclamation Repealing Proclamation No. 26/1996."

#### 2. Repeal

The National Research Institute of Health Establishment Proclamation No. 271/1985 is hereby repealed.

#### 3. Transfer of Rights and Obligations

The rights and obligations of the National Research Institute of Health are hereby transferred to the Ethiopian Health and Nutrition Research Institute established under Council of Ministers Regulations No. 4/1996.

#### 4. Effective Date

This Proclamation shall come into force as of the 15th day of February, 1996.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 15th day of February, 1996.**

> ##### NEGASO GIDADA (DR.)
>
> ##### PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIΟΡΙΑ

# COUNCIL OF MINISTERS REGULATIONS NO. 4/1996

### COUNCIL OF MINISTERS REGULATIONS TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ETHIOPIAN HEALTH AND NUTRITION RESEARCH INSTITUTE

These Regulations are issued by the Council of Minis-
ters pursuant to Article 5 of the Definition of Powers and
Duties of the Executive Organs of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia Proclamation No.4/1995.

#### 1. Short Title

These Regulations may be cited as the "Ethiopian
Health and Nutrition Research Institute Establishment
Council of Ministers Regulations No. 4/1996."

#### 2. Establishment

1) There is hereby established the Ethiopian Health and
Nutrition Research Institute (hereinafter "the Ins-
titute") as an autonomous public authority having its
own legal personality.
2) The Institute shall be accountable to the Minister of
Health.

#### 3. Head Office

The Institute shall have its Head Office in Addis Ababa,
and may establish branch offices elsewhere as may be
necessary.

#### 4. Objectives of the Institute

The Institute shall have the following objectives:

    1) to conduct research on the causes and spread of
    diseases, nutrition, traditional medicines and
    medical practices and modern drugs and thereby
    support the activities for the improvement of health
    in the country.
    2) to contribute to the development of health science and
    technology.

#### 5. Powers and Duties of the Institute

The Institute shall have the following powers and
duties:

    1) to collect and compile data for research;
    2) to conduct research on the production of diagnostic,
    prophylactic and therapeutic substances;,
    3) to make joint efforts with the concerned offices or
    institutes for the initiation of research activities;
    4) to undertake research on ways of preventing diseases
    due to malnutrition and nutritional deficiencies, as
    well as nutritional improvements at family level;
    5) to undertake studies on the causes, health impacts and
    distribution of diseases, in collaboration with those
    concerned;
    6) to do research on traditional and modern drugs as well
    as on traditional medical practices and study the
    integration of those found to be useful into the health
    service system;
    7) to conduct nutritional science and technology research
    on food items in collaboration with other necessary
    bodies within the country;
    8) to study the production of traditional drugs whose
    therapeutic efficacy and safety have been proven by
    laboratory and clinical researches;
    9)  to prepare a preliminary pharmacopoeia on
    traditional drugs;
    10) to prepare, in collaboration with those concerned,
    conducive situations whereby traditional medicine
    practitioners can develop their profession through
    training and education to improve the quality of
    health services they render;
    11) to cooperate with concerned organizations and put on
    all efforts for the conservation and protection of
    plants which serve as traditional drugs, and other
    medical antiques from extinction;
    12) to impart professional consultancy services as
    deemed necessary, as well as receive and undertake
    laboratory tests on samples submitted at referral
    level;
    13) to charge fees for the services it renders;
    14) to own properties and enter into contracts;
    15) to sue and be sued in its own name;
    16) to carry out such other activities as are necessary for
    the attainment of its objectives.

#### 6. Organization of the Institute

The Institute shall have:
1) a Board of Directors (hereinafter "the Board");
2) a Director to be appointed by the Government upon the
the recommendation of the Board;
3) the necessary staff.

#### 7. Members of the Board

    1) The Vice Minister of Health            Chairman
    2) a Representative of the Ethiopian
    Science and Technology Commis-
    sion                                  Member(s)
    3) Representatives of higher
    education institutions in the
    medical field                        "
    4) a Member to be appointed by the
    Government                             "
    5) The Director of the Ethiopian
    Health and Nutrition Research
    Institute                              Member &
                                            Secretary

#### 8. Powers and Duties of the Board

The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
    1) to follow-up the implementation of the objectives as
    well as the powers and duties of the Institute provided
    in Articles 4 and 5 of these Regulations;
    2) to analyze and approve policies and directives
    submitted by the Institute;
    3) to evaluate, approve and monitor the research
    programmes of the Institute;
    4) to approve the appointment of officials directly
    accountable to the Director of the Institute;
    5) to approve the personnel regulations as well as fix the
    salary and allowances of the technical and scientific
    staff of the Institute;
    6) to approve, as well as determine the allocation and
    disbursement of the draft budget of the Institute.

#### 9. Meetings of the Board

    1) The Board shall have its ordinary meetings every
    three months. Extraordinary meetings may be
    convened as deemed necessary.
    2) There shall be a quorum where the majority of the
    members are present.
    3) Decisions of the Board shall be passed by a majority
    vote. In case of a tie the Chairman shall have a casting
    vote.
    4) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Article, the
    Board may issue its own rules of procedure.

#### 10. Powers and Duties of the Director

    1) The Director shall be the chief executive of the
    Institute and shall, subject to the general directives
    issued to him by the Board, be responsible for the
    proper management and direction of its activities.
    2) Without limiting the generality of the provisions of
    sub-Article (1) of this Article, the Director shall:

        (a) exercise the powers and duties vested in the
        Institute under Article 5 of these Regulations;
        (b) employ and administer the technical and scien-
        tific staff in accordance with the personnel
        regulations approved by the Board as well as
        administer other personnel in accordance with
        federal civil service laws;
        (c) prepare the annual budget and work programme
        of the Institute and submit same to the Board;
        (d) effect payments in accordance with the approved
        budget and work programme of the Institute;
        (e) submit to the Board an annual report on the
        activities of the Institute.

    3) The Director may delegate part of his powers to the
    Deputy Director or to other employees of the
    Institute to the extent necessary for the effective
    performance of the activities of the Institute.

#### 11. Budget

    1) The budget of the Institute shall be drawn from the
    following sources:
        (a) budgetary allocation by the Federal Government;
        (b) service fees collected in accordance with these
        Regulations;
        (c) any other source.
    2) The fund indicated in sub-Article (1) of this Article
    shall be deposited in a bank in the name of the
    Institute and shall be expended, in accordance with
    Government budgetary rules, to give effect to the
    objectives of the Institute.

#### 12. Books of Accounts.

    1) The Institute shall keep complete and accurate books
    of accounts.
    2) The books of accounts and financial documents of
    the Institute shall be audited annually by the Auditor
    General or by other auditors designated by him.

#### 13. Effective Date

These Regulations shall enter into force on the date of
their publication in the Federal Negarit Gazeta.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 15th day of February, 1996.**

> ##### MELES ZENAWI
>
> ##### PRIME MINISTER OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA