---
title:  Proclamation No. 30/1996
---

# Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction Ratification Proclamation

A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE CONVENTION ON THE PROHIBITION OF THE DEVELOPMENT, PRODUCTION, STOCKPILING AND USE OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS AND ON THEIR DESTRUCTION PROCLAMATION

WHEREAS, Ethiopia is one of the signatories to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction, done in Paris on the 13th day of January, 1993;

WHEREAS, the House of Peoples' Representatives has ratified said Convention at its session held on the 22nd day of February, 1996;

NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:

#### 1.  SHORT TITLE

This Proclamation may be cited as the "Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction Ratification Proclamation No. 30/1996."

#### 2.  RATIFICATION OF THE CONVENTION

The Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction, done in Paris on the 13th of January, 1993, is hereby ratified.

#### 3.  POWERS OF THE MINISTRY OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY

The Ministry of Trade and Industry is hereby empowered to undertake, in cooperation with the appropriate government organs, all acts necessary for the implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction.

#### 4.  EFFECTIVE DATE

This Proclamation shall enter into force as of the 22nd day of February, 1996.

Done at Addis Ababa, this 22nd day of February, 1996.

> ##### NEGASO GIDADA (DR.)
>
> ##### PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA

# COUNCIL OF MINISTERS REGULATIONS NO. 5/1996

### COUNCIL OF MINISTERS REGULATIONS TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ETHIOPIAN INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR PEACE AND DEVELOPMENT

These Regulations are issued by the Council of Ministers pursuant to Article 5 of the Definition of Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Proclamation No. 4/1995.

#### 1.  SHORT TITLE

These Regulations may be cited as the "Ethiopian International Institute for Peace and Development Establishment Council of Ministers Regulations No. 5/1996."

#### 2.  DEFINITIONS

In these Regulations "Ministry" means the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

#### 3.  ESTABLISHMENT

    1.  The Ethiopian International Institute for Peace and Development (hereinafter "the Institute") is hereby established as an autonomous institution having its own juridical personality.
    
    2.  The Institute shall be accountable to the Ministry.

#### 4.  HEAD OFFICE

The Institute shall have its head office in Addis Ababa and may establish branch offices elsewhere as may be necessary.

#### 5.  OBJECTIVES

The Institute shall have the following objectives:

    1.  to undertake research and training activities designed to promote cooperation and partnership between Ethiopia and the International Community with a view to further ensuring strict observance of democratic and human rights guaranteed to all citizens by the Constitution, further strengthening of the prevailing peace and stability and enhancing the progress of economic and social development;
    
    2.  to contribute towards strengthening relations among countries of the Horn of Africa based on mutual trust and respect and on the promotion of common interests and benefits;
    
    3.  to explore the potential for future enhancement of security, stability and socio-economic development in Ethiopia and the Horn of Africa through promotion and assistance in research activities and the provision of conceptual and practical support through on-going training programmes;
    
    4.  to promote cooperation between countries of the Horn of Africa and the international community with a view to strengthening the latter's assistance and support in building sustainable peace and development in the region, and to promote the creation and expansion of relations, based on mutual benefits, with other regions.

#### 6.  POWERS AND DUTIES

The Institute shall have the following powers and duties:

    1.  to conduct and disseminate policy-option studies on issues relating to peace and development;
    
    2.  to review the implementation and application of policies and principles pertaining to the building of democratic institutions, the observance of human rights, the maintenance of peace and security and relating to foreign relations and cooperation as well as the building of economic and social development with a view to, based on studies, proposing and disseminating alternative methods of implementation;
    
    3.  to undertake research and studies and to conduct training designed to promote democratic culture and the handling of differences through peaceful and democratic means, to ensure the strict observance of human rights, to enhance good governance characterized with accountability, transparency and public confidence, and to promote the expansion and strengthening of democratic institutions;
    
    4.  to collect and analyze information on issues relating to peace and development, and to disseminate same to those concerned;
    
    5.  to contribute and assist in the peaceful resolution of conflicts arising at national or regional level;
    
    6.  to conduct training programs designed to promote sustainable peace and development with particular emphasis on peaceful methods of conflict resolution and peace-keeping;
    
    7.  to sponsor special forums such as seminars, workshops, symposia and conferences to share in-depth knowledge and practical experience;
    
    8.  to establish relations of cooperation with governmental and international agencies, non-governmental organizations and institutions having similar goals;
    
    9.  to publish and distribute the results of its studies and research activities;
    
    10. to accept assistance and donations in connection with the fulfillment of its objectives;
        
    11. to fix and collect fees, as may be necessary, for services it renders;
        
    12. to own property, enter into contracts and to sue and be sued in its own name;
        
    13. to carry out such other activities as may be necessary for the fulfillment of its objectives.

#### 7.  ORGANIZATION OF THE INSTITUTE

The Institute shall have:

    1.  a Board of Trustees (hereinafter "the Board");
    
    2.  a Director and Deputy Director to be appointed by the Ministry; and
    
    3.  the necessary staff.

#### 8.  MEMBERS OF THE BOARD

The Chairman and other members of the Board shall be designated by the Ministry.

#### 9.  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD

The Board shall have the powers and duties to:

    1.  direct and supervise the activities of the Institute;
    
    2.  examine and approve the Institute's study, research and training programs, and follow-up the implementation of same;
    
    3.  approve the Institute's annual budget, and supervise the implementation of same;
    
    4.  approve and follow-up the implementation of the internal regulations of the Institute;
    
    5.  deliberate and decide on other policy issues to be submitted to it by the Director;
    
    6.  evaluate the performance of the Institute and submit reports to the Ministry together with its recommendations.

#### 10. MEETINGS OF THE BOARD

    1.  The Board shall meet as frequently as the activities of the Institute so require.
    
    2.  There shall be a quorum where more than half of the members are present at a meeting of the Board.
    
    3.  Decisions of the Board shall be passed when supported by a majority vote of members present at the meeting; provided, however, that the Chairman shall have a casting vote in case of a tie.
    
    4.  The Board may determine its own rules of procedure.
    
    5.  Fees to be paid to members of the Board shall be determined by the internal regulations of the Institute upon obtaining the prior consent of the Ministry.

#### 11. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR

    1.  The Director shall be the chief executive officer of the Institute and shall, subject to the general directives of the Board, direct and administer the activities of the Institute.
    
    2.  Without limiting the generality stated in sub-Article (1) of this Article, the Director shall:
    
        a.  exercise the powers and duties of the Institute specified in Article 5 of these Regulations;
        
        b.  employ and administer employees of the Institute in accordance with the internal regulations of the Institute to be adopted by the Board in observance of the basic principles of federal civil service laws;
        
        c.  prepare and submit to the Board the work programs and budget of the Institute, and implement same upon approval;
        
        d.  effect expenditure in accordance with the approved budget and work program of the Institute;
        
        e.  represent the Institute in all its dealings with third parties;
        
        f.  prepare and submit to the Board the operational and financial reports of the Institute.
        
    3.  The Director may delegate part of his powers and duties to the Deputy Director and to other employees of the Institute to the extent necessary for the efficient performance of the activities of the Institute.

#### 12. BUDGET

    1.  The budget of the Institute shall be drawn from the following sources:
    
        a.  Federal Government subsidy;
        
        b.  grants and donations received by the Institute;
        
        c.  service fees collected by the Institute; and
        
        d.  any other source.
        
    2.  The fund referred to in sub-Article (1) of this Article shall be deposited in a bank account to be opened in the name of the Institute and shall be expended on the implementation of the objectives of the Institute.

#### 13. BOOKS OF ACCOUNTS

    1.  The Institute shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts.
    
    2.  Without prejudice to the powers of the Auditor General vested in him by law, the books of accounts and financial documents of the Institute shall be audited annually by external auditors to be designated by the Board.

#### 14. EFFECTIVE DATE

These Regulations shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Federal Negarit Gazeta.

Done at Addis Ababa, this 22nd day of February, 1996.

> ##### MELES ZENAWI
>
> ##### PRIME MINISTER OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA