---
title: Proclamation No. 77/1997
---

# Sales and Excise Tax (Amendment) Proclamation

WHEREAS, it has become necessary to amend the
Sales and Excise Tax Proclamation;

NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1)
of the Constitution, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:

#### 1. Short Title

This Proclamation may be cited as the "Sales and Excise
Tax (Amendment) Proclamation No. 77/1997."

#### 2. Amendment

The Sales and Excise Tax Proclamation No. 68/1993 is
amended as follows:

    1) Sub-Article (3) (a) of Article 8 is deleted and
    replaced by the following new sub-Article (3) (a):
        "3(a) Where the tax payer is a producer, service
        supplier, wholesaler or retailer, he shall
        declare and pay the tax on a monthly sales
        transaction within seven working days from
        the end of the month, at the latest."
    2) Numbers 1, 2.2, 2.3.3, 3, 5.2, 6 and 17 of Schedule
    D attached to the Proclamation are deleted and
    replaced by the following numbers:
        "1. Any type of sugar excluding molasses 33%
        "2.2 Mineral Water 40%
        "2.3.3 Other alcoholic drinks 50%
        "3. All types of pure alcohol 150%
        5.2 Cigarettes, cigar, cigarillos, pipe
        tobacco, snuff and other tobacco
        products. 75%
        "6. Salt 30%
        "17. Land Rovers, Jeeps and other
        Fourwheel Drives 40%
    3) The Minister of Finance is hereby empowered to
    substitute the rates indicated below for their
    counterparts in numbers 2.1 and 2.3.1 of Schedule
    D attached to the Proclamation, if satisfied that
    conditions listed under sub-Article (4) hereunder
    are fulfilled:
        2.1 All types of soft drinks except squash and
        similar juices 40%
        2.3.1 All types of beer and stout 50%
    4) Conditions Precedent
        The provisions of Sub-Article (3) above become
        applicable:
            1. In the case of soft drinks, where the production
            has increased by 70% (seventy percent) or new
            factories thereof are established.
            2. In the case of Beer, where the production has
            increased by 50% (fifty percent) or new
            breweries are established.

#### 3. Effective Date

This Proclamation shall enter into force as of the 3rd
day of June, 1997.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 3rd day of June, 1997.**

> ##### NEGASO GIDADA (DR.)
>
> ##### PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA