---
title: Proclamation No. 82/1997
---

# National Petroleum Reserve Depots Administration Proclamation

WHEREAS, it is essential to keep National Petroleum Reserve to maintain regular petroleum supply incase of interruption or shortage of petroleum.

WHEREAS, in order to attain these objective it is necessary to establish an autonomous public institution of the Federal Government.

NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:-

### 1. SHORT TITLE

This Proclamation may be cited as the "National Petroleum Reserve Depots Administration Proclamation No. 82/ 1997.".

### 2. DEFINITIONS

In this Proclamation:

    1. "Petroleum' means benzene, diesel, residual fuel oil, jet fuel, kerosene, butagas and other hydrocarbon products.
    2. "Urgent Petroleum Shortage" means an interruption or decrease of regular petroleum supply due to natural or man made disaster, or any other reason;
    3) "National Petroleum Reserve" means stored petroleum which helps to cover the shortage of petroleum whenever it occurs;
    4) "Ministry" and "Minister" means the Ministry of Mines and Energy and the Minister, respectively.

### 3. ESTABLISHMENT

    1) National Petroleum Reserve Depots Administration (here in after referred to as the "Adminstration") is hereby established as an autonomous public institution of the Federal Government.
    2) The Administration shall be accountable to the Minister.

### 4. HEAD OFFICE

The head office of the Administration shall be in Addis Ababa and it may have branch offices elsewhere as may be necessary.

### 5. OBJECTIVES

The objectives of the Administration shall be to store and administer National Petroleum Reserve.

### 6. POWERS AND DUTIES

The Administration shall have the following powers and duties:

    1) study the number, size and distribution of National Petroleum Reserve Depots required in the Country and prepares plan and budget for their construction and cause the implementation of same when approved;
    2) Prepare or cause to be prepared by employing consultant engineers of the design of Depots;
    3) Construct by itself or cause the construction, by em-ploying contractors, of the petroleum depots and ensure by its professionls or Consultant Engineers that the construction is carried out in accordance with the design and the agreement;
    4) Plan the amount of National Petroleum Reserve to be stored in Depots, effect then purchase of same upon approval and ensure that they are kept safe;
    5) on urgent petroleum shortage, subject to directives of the minister, distribute petroleum from the storage;
    6) carry out the necessary technical protection to maintain the quality of the stored petroleum and devise the necessary methods to keep stored petroleum from change its chemical properties or wastage by evaporation due to long time of storage;
    7) Ensure the construction of depots and petroleum storage works conform to the rules of environment protection;
    8) Own properties, enter into contracts and sue or be sued in its name;
    9) Perform such other activities incidental to its objectives.

### 7. ORGANIZATION OF THE ADMINISTRATION

The Administration shall have:

    1. general manager, and;
    2. the necessary staff.

### 8. GENERAL MANAGER

    1) The General Manager shall be appointed by the Govern-ment upon presentation of the Minister.
    2) The General Manager shall manage and administer the Administration subject to the general directives of the Minister.
    3) Without prejudice to the generality stated under sub-Article(2) of this Article the General Manager shall:
        1. (a) exercise the powers and duties of the Adminis-tration specified under Article 6 of this Proclamation;
        2. (b) following the basic principles of the federal civil service laws and subject to the directives of the Minister, employ and administer professionals who will engage in the technical activities of the Administration, Employ and administer other em-ployees based on the federal civil service laws;
        3. (c) prepare work program and budget of the Adminis-tration and implement same upon approval;
        4. (d) effect expenditure in accordance with approved budget of the Administration;
        5. (e) represent the administration in all its relations with third parties;
        6. (f) prepare and submit annual reports of the Adminis-tration to the Minister.
    4) The General Manager may delegate part of his powers and duties to officials and employees of the Adminis-tration to the extent necessary for the efficient management of the Administration.

### 9. BUDGET

The budget of the Administration shall be allocated by the government.

### 10. BOOKS OF ACCOUNT

    1) The Administration shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts.
    2) The Administration's books of account shall be audited annually by the Auditor General or Auditors assigned by him.

### 11. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Proclamation shall enter into force as of the 1st day of July, 1997.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 1st day of July, 1997.**

> ##### NEGASO GIDADA (DR.)
>
> ##### PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA