---
title: Proclamation No. 117/1998
---

# ANIMAL, ANIMAL PRODUCTS AND BY-PRODUCTS MARKETING DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ESTABLISHMENT

WHEREAS, animals, animal products and by-products are agricultural resources having an important role in the economy of the country;

WHEREAS, it has become necessary to regulate, control and coordinate the supply and marketing of this resource in appropriate ways in order to maximize the benefit that the country can obtain;

WHEREAS, it has become essential to give information and assistance to those individual persons and organizations engaged in animal, animal products and by-products trade activities, as well as to facilitate the marketing condition thereof;

WHEREAS, it is believed that the sector of the export of animals, animal products and by-products, so far without a specific responsible body, needs to be carried out in an efficient and centralized manner, except such specialized activities that require handling by a different body;

WHEREAS, to implement the foregoing it is found necessary to establish an autonomous and responsible public authority with appropriate powers and duties;

#### 1. Short Title

This Proclamation may be cited as the "Animal, Animal
Products and By-Products Marketing Development
Authority Establishment Proclamation No. 117/1998."

#### 2. DEFINITIONS

Unless the context otherwise requires in this proclamation:

    1) "Animal" means cattle, sheep, goat, camel, poultry, pig, bee and includes other animals which the Authority for the purpose of this proclamation designates as animals;
    2) "Animal Product" means meat, milk, butter, cheese, egg, honey wax, sheep hair, as well as wool and includes other products which the Authority desig-nates as animal products;
    3) "Animal by-product" means everthing of value produced from the slaughter of animal such as hide, skin, horn, hoof, blood, bone and meat meal and includes other by-products which the Authority in the future designates as animal by-products;
    4) "Quarantine" means a mode of prevention and control of the spread of various contagious and infectious animal diseases within the country, from the country or to the country;
    5) "Quarantine station'' means a specified and demar-cated area where animals, animal products and by-products are kept under strict follow up and control;
    6) "Staging point" means a demarcated area es-tablished within a limited interval along the routes of trade of animals to provide feed, water, veterinary and resting services for trade stock;
    7) "Service charge" means an amount of money payable, for any service rendered by the Authority, pursuant to regulations to be issued;
    8) "Region" means any of those Regions specified under Article 47(1) of the constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and, for the purpose of this proclamation, includes the Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa Administrations.

#### 3. ESTABLISHMENT

    1) The Animal, Animal Products and By-products Authority (hereinafter referred to as "the Authority") is hereby established as an autonomous Federal Government body having juridical per-sonality.
    2) The Authority shall be accountable to the Prime Minister.

#### 4. HEAD OFFICE

The Authority shall have its head office in Addis Ababa and may have branch offices in Regions as may be necessary.

#### 5. OBJECTIVE

The Authority shall have the objective of promoting the domestic and export marketing of animal, animal products and by-products through increasing their supply and improved quality.

#### 6. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE AUTHORITY

The Authority shall have the following powers and duties:

    1) initiate policies, laws and regulations that can promote the country's animal, animal products and by-products marketing and, upon approval, devise means for, follow-up and supervise, their implemen-tation;
    2) in collaboration with the concerned bodies, issue quality control directives on exportable and impor-table animal, animal products and by-products and follow up their trading activities;
    3) establish and encourage the establishment of staging points for domestic and export trade stock with the necessary facilities and in collaboration with ap-propriate Government bodies and institutions follow up the facilitation of the means of transport for trade stock;
    4) establish Quarantine Stations for use in the export and import of animal, animal products and by products; provide quarantine services in cooperation with the Ministry of Agriculture;
    5) in cooperation with the concerned bodies, promote the organization of livestock markets, abattoirs, hides and skins sheds and expansion of their services;
    6) in cooperation with the concerned bodies, supervise the construction of export animal, animal products and by-products processing plants in accordance with international requirements and constructional standards and issue certificate of competence;
    7) issue criteria that ought to be fulfilled by domestic, import and export traders engaged in animal, animal products and by-products trading activities and provide information to the concerned bodies;
    8) seek ways and means of promoting and expanding animal, animal products and by-products markets in foreign countries by establishing commercial relationship with different countries;
    9) in cooperation with the appropriate bodies and institutions, designate directions for trade stock movement, issue stock movement directives and follow up the implementation;
    10) collect, analyze and disseminate information on the current demands and international animal, animal products and by-products market situation to producers, domestic and foreign consumers and traders;
    11) encourage the condition of research and study on animal, animal products and by-products marketing, disseminate research results to be-neficiaries and when necessary conduct studies with a view to enhancing the marketing of animal, animal products and by-products;
    12) prepare directives enabling it to collect fee for the service it renders and upon approval, implement same;
    13) in cooperation with the concerned bodies, en-courage and provide support to promote the de-velopment of animal, animal products and by-products;
    14) follow up the preservation of hide and skin quality from slaughtering to marketing;
    15) give techincal support and advice to the Regions by creating relationship with them;
    16) in order to fulfil its objective, own movable and immovable property, enter into contracts, sue and be sued in its own name.

#### 7. ORGANIZATION OF THE AUTHORITY

The Authority shall have:

    1) a Management Board (hereinafter called "the Board");
    2) a Manager to be appointed by the Government upon the recommendation of the Board; and
    3) other necessary staff.

#### 8. MEMBERS OF THE BOARD

The Board shall have seven members to be appointed by the Government.

#### 9. MEETINGS OF THE BOARD

    1) The Board shall hold a regular meeting once every three months; however, it may at any time hold an extraordinary meeting, whenever found necessary.
    2) There shall be a quorum where more than half of the members of the Board are present at its meetings.
    3) Decisions of the Board shall be passed by a majority vote; in case of a tie, however, the chairman shall have a casting vote.
    4) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Article, the Board may draw up its own rules of procedure.

#### 10. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD

The Board shall have the following powers and duties:

    1) to ensure that the Authority carries out its powers and duties in accordance with its objective, direct and supervise its activities, submit the short and long term plans and annual work programme and budget of the Authority to the Government for approval;
    2) to deliberate and decide on other policy issues proposed by the Manager of the Authority;
    3) to give general directives to the Manager of the Authority;
    4) to examine the work programme and budget of the Authority submitted to it by the Manager and, up on approval, supervise the implementation of same

#### 11. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MANAGER

    1) The Manager, accountable to the Board, shall be the chief executive officer of the Authority and shall direct its activities.
    2) Without limiting the generality stated in sub-Ar-ticle (1) of this Article, the Manager shall:
        (a) exercise the powers and duties of the Authority specified in Article 6 of this Proclamation;
        (b) employ and administer employees of the Authority in accordance with the federal civil service laws;
        (c) prepare the work programme and budget of the Authority and implement same upon approval;
        (d) effect expenditure in accordance with the ap-proved budget and work programme of the Authority;
        (e) represent the Authority in all its dealings with third parties;
        (f) submit reports on the activities and accounts of the Authority.
    3) The Manager may delegate part of his powers and duties to other officials of the Authority to the extent necessary for the efficiency of the Authority.

#### 12. BUDGET

The Authority shall be administered by fees collected from services it renders, any other source of income it obtains and budget allocated by the Government.

#### 13. BOOKS OF ACCOUNTS

    1) The Authority shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts.
    2) The books of accounts and financial documents of the Authority shall be audited annually by the Auditor General or by auditors designated by him.

#### 14. POWER TO ISSUE REGULATIONS

The Council of Ministers may issue regulations for the implementation of this Proclamation.

#### 15. REPEALED AND INAPPLICABLE LAWS

    1) The following are hereby repealed:
        (a) Livestock and Meat Board Proclamation No. 212/1964;
        (b) Livestock and Meat Board Order No. 34/ 1964.
    2) No other law or customary practice inconsistent with this Proclamation or regulations issued hereunder shall have effect with respect to matters governed by this Proclamation.

#### 16. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Proclamation shall come into force as of the 16th day of June, 1998.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 16th day of June, 1998.**

> ##### NEGASO GIDADA (DR.)
>
> ##### PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIΟΡΙΑ
