---
title: Proclamation No. 123/1998
---

# Defence Forces (Amendment) Proclamation

WHEREAS, it is found necessary to amend the Defence Forces Proclamation;

NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) and (7) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:

### 1. Short Title

This Proclamation may be cited as the "Defence Forces (Amendment) Proclamation No. 123/1998."

### 2. Amendment

The Defence Forces Proclamation No. 27/1996 is hereby amended as follows:

    1) Sub-Article (2) of Article 9 is deleted while sub-Articles (3) and (4) are renumbered as sub-Articles (2) and (3), respectively.
    2) Sub-Article (3) of Article 13 is deleted and replaced by the following new sub-Article (3):
        "3) The age-limits for termination of service, specified under sub-Articles (1) and (2) of Article 9 hereinabove, shall also be deemed to be retirement age-limits for purposes of the application of pension laws."
    3) Article 15 is deleted and replaced by the following new Article 15:

"15. Medals, Orders and Prizes
Any member of the Defence Forces shall be awarded with Medals, Orders or Prizes for notable service, heroism as well as for new findings or creative work in accordance with this Proclamation or other relevant laws and direc-tives."

### 4) Article 21 is deleted and replaced by the following new Article 21:

"21 Obligatory Service
A member of the armed forces having received the benefit of specialized training or schooling shall, subsequent to its completion, have the obligation to serve twice of the duration of schooling or training; however, such an obligatory services cannot be less than one year."

### 5) Article 33 is deleted and replaced by the following new Article:

"33. Investigation and Suit

    1) Intensive and impartial investigation shall be carried out prior to bringing a case before a military court.
    2) A case for investigation, pursuant to sub-Article (1) of this Article, may be referred to a soldier or a team of soldiers or to the police as necessary.
    3) Where it is necessary to bring a charge the case shall be referred to the appropriate military court. A public prosecutor will be assigned to follow up the case."

### 6) A new Part Six is added after Article 36.

"Part six

Medals, Ribbons, and Certificates Privileges due to Awardees

37. Medals, Ribbons and Certificates

    1) The following are Medals, Ribbons and Certificates to be bestowed upon Members of the Defence Forces:
        (a) The Medal of the Victory of Adwa;
        (b) The Medal of Heroism 1st Rank;
        (c) The Medal of Heroism 2nd Rank;
        (d) The Medal of Heroism 3rd Rank;
        (e) The Medal with Palm Leaf for Participation in the Armed Struggle;
        (f) The Medal without Palm Leaf for Participation in the Armed Struggle;
        (g) The Medal of Distinguished Labour;
        (h) The Medal of Military Service 1st Rank;
        (i) The Medal of Military Service 2nd Rank;
        (j) The Medal of Military Service 3rd Rank;
        (k) The Medal of International Peace Keeping;
        (l) The Medal of the Wounded;
        (m) The Military Service Ribbon;
        (n) Combat Certificate.

    2) The dimension, shape and substance of the Medals, Ribbon and Certificates enumerated under sub-Article (1) of this Article shall be prescribed by directives of the Council of Ministers..

### 38. The Medal of the Victory of Adwa

    1) The Medal of the Victory of Adwa is the highest award that may be bestowed upon an Ethiopian individual, military unit or group that has performed unparalleled feats of bravery in a battlefield.
    2) Awardee of the Medal of the Victory of Adwa:
        (a) shall be entitled to a one time payment of 25,000 Birr. Where he has died his survivors shall be entitled to same in accordance with the proportion specified in the Pension Law;
        (b) shall take a seat in the place reserved for high government officials during any public ceremony;
        (c) shall receive a special identity card autographed by the Head of State;
        (d) may have a school, a hospital, an avenue or a public square or any other similar memorial, in his birth place, named after him.
    3) A school, a hospital, an avenue, a bridge, a public square or any other similar memorial in the Federal Capital City may be named after an individual who has been awarded the Medal of the Victory of Adwa for the second time. In addition a statute may be erected for such an individual.
    4) A military unit or group awarded with the Medal of the Victory of Adwa shall be entitled to Birr 100,000 and a special certificate autographed by the Head of State.
    5) Sub-Article 2(d) and (3) of this Article shall apply to the military unit and group, with birth place substituted by the battlefield of its exploits.

### 39. The Medal of Heroism 1st Rank

    1) The Medal of Heroism 1st Rank is an award that may be bestowed upon an Ethiopian in-dividual, military unit or group that has, beyond the call of ordinary duty, achieved very honorable feats of bravery in a battlefield.
    2) Awardee of the Medal of Heroism 1st Rank:
        (a) shall be entitled to a one time payment of 20,000 Birr. Where he has died his survivors shall be entitled to same in accordance with the proportion specified in the Pension Law;
        (b) shall take a seat in the place reserved for high government officials during any public ceremony at the place where the ceremony is held;
        (c) shall receive a special identity card autographed by the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.
    3) A school, a hospital, an avenue or a public square or any other similar memorial in his birth place may be named after an individual who has been awarded the Medal of Heroism 1st Rank for the second time.
    4) A school, a hospital, an avenue or a public square or other similar memorial in the Federal Capital City may be named after an individual who has been awarded the Medal of Heroism 1st Rank for the third time or the Medal of Heroism 1st rank and the Medal of the Victory of Adwa.
    5) Awardee of the Medal of Heroism 1st Rank is entitled to Birr 80,000 and shall receive a special identity card autographed by the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed forces.
    6) Sub-Article (3) and (4) of this Article shall be applicable to a military unit and group; with birth place substituted by the place where the heroic deed was performed.

### 40. The Medal of Heroism 2nd Rank

    1) The Medal of Heroism 2nd Rank is an award that may be bestowed upon an Ethiopian individual, military unit or group that has, beyond the call of ordinary duty, achieved honorable feats of bravery in a battlefield;
    2) Awardee of the Medal of Heroism 2nd Rank:
        (a) shall be entitled to a one time payment of 15,000 Birr. Where he has died, his survivors shall be entitled to same in accordance with the proportion specified in the Pension Law;
        (b) shall take a seat in the place reserved for high government officials during any public ceremony at the place where the ceremony is held;
        (c) shall receive a special identity card autographed by the General Chief of Staff.
    3) A military unit or group awarded with the Medal of Heroism 2nd Rank is entitled to Birr 40,000 and shall receive an identity card autographed by the General Chief of Staff.

### 41. The Medal of Heroism 3rd Rank

    1) The Medal of Heroism 3rd Rank is an award that may be bestowed upon an Ethiopian individual, military unit or group that has, beyond the call of ordinary duty, achieved commendable feats of bravery in the battlefield;
    2) Awardee of Medal of Heroism 3rd Rank:
        (a) shall be entitled to a one time payment of 10,000 Birr. Where he has died, his survivors shall be entitled to same in accordance with the proportion specified in the Pension Law;
        (b) shall receive a special identity card autographed by the General Chief of Staff.
    3) Awardee of Medal of Heroism 3rd Rank for the third or more time shall take a seat in the place reserved for high government officials during any public ceremony at the place where the ceremony is held;
    4) A military unit or group awarded with the Medal of Heroism 3rd Rank is entitled to Birr 40,000 and a special identity card autographed by the General Chief of Staff;

### 42. The Medal with Palm Leaf for Participation in the Armed Struggle

    1) The Medal with Palm Leaf for Participation in the Armed struggle shall be awarded to all fighters who served no less than ten years in the struggle (1975-May 28/1991) to remove the Derg regime and establish peace and democracy in Ethiopia.
    2) An awardee of the Medal with Palm Leaf for Participation in the Armed Struggle shall receive a special identity card autographed by the General Chief of Staff.

### 43. The Medal without Palm Leaf for Participation in the Armed Struggle

    1) The Medal without Palm Leaf for Participation in the Armed Struggle shall be awarded to all fighters who served less than ten years in the struggle (1975-May 28/1991) to remove the Derg regime and establish peace and democracy in Ethiopia.
    2) An awardee of the Medal without Palm Leaf for Participation in the Armed Struggle shall receive a special identity card autographed by the General Chief of Staff.

### 44. The Medal of Distinguished Labour

    1) The Medal of Distinguished Labour is an award that may be bestowed upon a person, military unit or group that has through mental labour, or way of invention or in any other field, scored unparalleled achievement for the mission of the Defence Forces.
    2) Awardee of the Medal of Distinguished Labour shall:
        (a) be entitled to Bir