---
title: Proclamation No. 133/1998
---

# Agency for the Administration of Rented Houses Establishment (Amendment) Proclamation

WHEREAS, it is found necessary to amend the Agency for the Administration of Rented Houses Establishment Proclamation;

NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:

#### 1. Short Title

This Proclamation may be cited as the "Agency for the Administration of Rented Houses Establishment (Amendment) Proclamation No. 133/1998."

#### 2. Amendment

Proclamation No. 311/1989 which was issued to amend the Agency for the Administration of Rented Houses Establishment Proclamation No. 59/1975 is hereby repealed and the Proclamation is re-amended as follows:

    1) Article 3 is deleted and replaced by the following new Article 3:

        "3. Establishment

            1) There is hereby established the Agency for the Administration of Rented Houses (hereinafter "the Agency") as an autonomous federal agency having juridical personality.

    2) The Agency shall be accountable to the Ministry of Public works and Urban Development."

    2) Article 7 is deleted and replaced by he following New Article 7:

        "7. Organization

        The Agency shall have:

            1) a Management Board (hereinafter "the Board");
            2) a General Manager; and
            3) the necessary staff."

    3) Article 8 is deleted and replaced by the following new Article 8:

        "8. Members of the Board

        Members of the Board including the chairperson shall be appointed by the Government; and their number shall be determined as may be necessary."

#### 3. Effective Date

This Proclamation shall come into force as of the 24th day of November, 1998.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 24th day of November, 1998.**

> ##### NEGASO GIDADA (DR.)
>
> ##### PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOΡΙΑ