---
title: Proclamation No. 2/1995
---

# Declaration of the Establishment of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Proclamation

WHEREAS, the Nations, Nationalities and Peoples of Ethiopia have, through their elected Representatives, ratified the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia; 

WHEREAS, the Founding Assembly of the Federation has been convened subsequent to the election and delegation, pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution, of Deputies to the House of Peoples' Representatives and to the House of the Federation of the Federal Government; 

NOW THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) of the Constitution, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:

### 1. SHORT TITLE

This Proclamation may be cited as the "Declaration of the Establishment of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Proclamation No. 2/1995".

### 2. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia is established as of the 21st day of August, 1995.

### 3. TRANSFER OF POWER

The House of Peoples' Representatives of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, has state power transferred to it from the Transitional Government as of the 21st day of August, 1995.

### 4. REPEALS

The following are hereby repealed:

    1. The Transitional Period Charter;

    2. The Definition of the Powers and Functions of the President Proclamation No. 1/1991.

### 5. APPLICATION OF PRIOR LAWS

All prior laws shall continue to apply unless they are inconsistent with the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.

### 6. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Proclamation shall enter into force as of the 22nd day of August, 1995.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 22nd day of August, 1995**

> ##### NEGASSO GIDADA (DR.)
>
> ##### PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOΡΙΑ