---
title: Proclamation No. 5/1995
---

# Federal Government Revenues Board Establishment Proclamation

WHEREAS, it is found necessary to establish the Government Revenues Board;

NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:

### 1. SHORT TITLE

This Proclamation may be cited as the "Federal Government Revenues Board Establishment Proclamation No. 5/ 1995."

### 2. ESTABLISHMENT

    1. The Government Revenues Board (hereinafter referred to as the "Board") is hereby established as an autonomous organ of the Federal Government.
    2. The Board shall be accountable to the Council of Ministers.

### 3. OBJECTIVE

The objective of the Board shall be to facilitate conditions for the systematic, efficient and timely collection of Government revenues and to direct their collection.

### 4. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD

The Board shall have the following powers and duties:

    1. to set up systems of supervision and follow up aimed at the efficient collection of Government revenues;
    2. to direct and supervise the Inland Revenue Authority, the Customs Authority and the National Lottery Ad-ministration;
    3. to ensure the due assessment, collection and proper keeping of accounts of Government revenues as well as of joint revenues of the Federal and Regional Govern-ments, in accordance with the relevant law;
    4. to perform such other duties as help enhance the carrying out of its activities.

### 5. MEMBERS OF THE BOARD

The Board shall have the following members:

    1. an Official to be appointed by the Government
    2. the Minister of Economic Development and Cooperation
    3. the Minister of Finance
    4. the General Manager of the Customs Authority
    5. the General Manager of the Inland Revenue Authority
    6. other Members to be designated by the Government

### 6. SECRETARIAT OF THE BOARD

    1. The Board shall have its own Secretariat.
    2. The Chairman of the Board shall be the Head of the Secretariat.
    3. The Secretariat shall:

        a) execute the decisions of the Board;
        b) employ and administer its personnel in accordance with the Federal civil service laws;
        c) own property, enter into contracts, sue and be sued in its own name.

### 7. BUDGET

The budget of the Secretariat shall be allocated by the Government.

### 8. BOOKS OF ACCOUNTS

    1. The Secretariat shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts.
    2. The Secretariat's books of accounts and financial documents shall be audited annually by the Auditor General or by auditors designated by him.

### 9. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Proclamation shall enter into force as of the 24th day of August, 1995.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 24th day of August, 1995.**

> ##### NEGASO GIDADA (DR.)
>
> ##### PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC
>
> ##### REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA