---
title: Proclamation No. 7/1995
---

# Establishment of the Ethiopian Science and Technology Commission Proclamation

Ethiopian Science and Technology Commission
Establishment Proclamation
Proclamation No. 7/1995
A PROCLAMATION TO PROVIDE
FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ETHIOPIAN
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION

WHEREAS, it has become necessary to establish the
Ethiopian Science and Technology Commission;

NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1)
of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:

### 1. Short Title

This Proclamation may be cited as the "Ethiopian Science and Technology Commission Establishment Proclamation
No. 7/1995."

### 2. Establishment

    1.  The Ethiopian Science and Technology Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "Commission") is hereby established as an autonomous public institution of the Federal Government.
    2.  The Commission shall be accountable to the Council of Ministers.

### 3. Head Office

The head office of the Commission shall be in Addis Ababa
and it may establish branch offices elsewhere as may be
necessary.

### 4. Objective

The objective of the Commission shall be to encourage and
enhance Science and Technology activities that enable the
realization of the country's socio- economic development
objectives.

### 5. Powers and Duties of the Commission

The Commission shall have the following powers and
duties:

    1.  to formulate the national science and technology
        policy which assist the country's development objec-
        tives and, upon approval by the Government, follow
        up its implementation;
    2.  to formulate widely applicable science and technology
        plans and issue directives for the formulation of
        sectoral science and technology policies, plans,
        programmes and projects, and assess and ensure that
        their preparation is made in accordance with the
        directives and submit for Government approval;
    3.  to support and encourage research and development
        centres and institutions that have contribution in the
        promotion of science and technology;
    4.  to provide awards /incentives to individuals and
        institutions that have contributed to the development
        of science and technology;
    5.  to develop the capability and establish the system for
        searching, selecting, negotiating, procuring, and im-
        porting technologies that are appropriate to the
        Ethiopian socio-economic conditions;
    6.  to initiate a patent law that encourages and supports
        technology transfer, enhances the practical ap-
        plication of inventions and encourages the develop-
        ment of inventions and innovation; to implement
        same upon authorization;
    7.  to assist and encourage the establishment of as-
        sociations that contribute to science and technology
        development and provide support for the publication
        and dissemination of science and technology papers
        prepared by professional associations;
    8.  to encourage and ensure the application of studies,
        research and development activities carried out to
        improve and develop indigenous technologies;
    9.  to establish a system for the collection of information
        on science and technology accomplishments, research
        work and results thereof;
    10. to keep a list of professionals and institutions that
        engage in research and development activities.

### 6. Organization of the Commission

The Commission shall have:

    1.  a National Science and Technology council (hereinafter referred to as the "Council");
    2.  a Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner appointed by the Government, and
    3.  the necessary staff.

### 7. Members of the Council

The Council shall have the following members:

    1.  The commissioner of the Commission...
        Chairman
    2.  a representative of the Ministry of
        Economic Development and
        Cooperation... Member
    3.  a representative of the Ministry of
        Health
    4.  a representative of the Ministry of
        Trade and Industry
    5.  a representative of the Ministry of Agriculture
    6.  a representtive of the Ministry of Mines and Energy
    7.  three prominent professionals to be designated by the Commissioner of the Commission
        Member(s)

### 8. Powers and Duties of the Council

The Council shall have the following powers and duties:

    1.  to deliberate, and make recommendations, on
        science and technology policy;
    2.  to evaluate all sectoral science and technology
        activities;
    3.  to issue different guidelines and work programmes.

### 9. Meetings of the Council

    1.  The Council shall hold a regular meeting once every
        three months; however, it may at any time hold an
        extraordinary meeting, whenever found necessary.
    2.  There shall be a quorum where the majority of the
        members of the Council are present at its meetings.
    3.  Decisions of the Council shall be passed by a majority
        vote; in case of a tie the Chairman shall have a casting
        vote.
    4.  Without prejudice to the other provisions of this
        Article, the Council may draw up its own rules of
        procedure.

### 10. Powers and Duties of the Commissioner

    1.  The Commissioner shall be the chief executive of the
        Commission and, as such, shall direct and administer
        the activities of the Commission.
    2.  Without limiting the generality stated in sub-Article
        (1) of this Article, the Commissioner shall:

        a) exercise the powers and duties of the Commission
        specified in Article 5 of this Proclamation;
        b) employ and administer employees of the Commis-
        sion in accordance with the Federal civil service
        laws;
        c) prepare the annual work programme and budget of
        the Commission and implement same upon ap-
        proval;
        d) effect expenditure in accordance with the ap-
        proved budget and work programme of the
        Commission;
        e) represent the Commission in all its dealings with
        third parties;
        f) submit reports on the activities of the Commission.
    3.  The Commissioner may delegate part of his powers and
        duties to the other officials and employees of the
        Commission to the extent necessary for the efficiency
        of the Commission.

### 11. Budget

The budget of the Commission shall be allocated by the
government.

### 12. Books of Accounts

    1.  The Commission shall keep complete and accurate
        books of accounts.
    2.  The Commission's books of accounts and financial
        documents shall be audited annually by the Auditor
        General or by Auditors designated by him.

### 13. Duty to Cooperate

Any person or governmental or private organization or
institution shall have the duty to cooperate in the
implementation of this Proclamation.

### 14. Repeal

The Ethiopian Science and Technology Commission
Establishment Proclamation No. 91/1994 is hereby
repealed.

### 15. Transfer of Rights and Obligations

The rights and obligations of the Ethiopian Science and
Technology Commission established under Proclamation
No. 91/1994 are hereby transferred to the Commission.

### 16. Effective Date

This Proclamation shall enter into force as of the 24th day
of August, 1995.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 24th day of August, 1995.**

> ##### NEGASO GIDADA (DR.)
>
> ##### PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA