---
title: Proclamation No. 8/1995
---

# Federal Civil Service Commission Establishment Proclamation

WHEREAS, it has become necessary to establish the Federal Civil Service Commission;

NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:

#### 1. Short Title

This Proclamation may be cited as the "Federal Civil Service Commission Establishment Proclamation No. 8/ 1995"

#### 2. Establishment

    1) The Federal Civil Service Commission/hereinafter referred to as the "Commission'"/ is hereby es- tablished as an autonomous public institution of the Federal Government.
    2) The commission shall be accountable to the Council of Ministers.

#### 3. Head Office

The head office of the Commission shall be in Addis Ababa.

#### 4. Objective

The objective of the Commission shall be to see to the realization of a meritorious, efficient, productive and permanent civil service, in accordance with the law.

#### 5. Powers and Duties of the Commission

The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:

    1) to prepare and, upon approval, follow up the im- plementation of policies and laws concerning the civil service;
    2) to issue general criteria on education and work experience necessary for civil service positions;
    3) to ensure that the recruitment, placement, promotion, transfer, training and observance of discipline of employees of the Federal civil service are effected in accordance with the law;
    4) to give final decision on requests to extend, in accordance with the law, the period of service of employees of the Federal civil service beyond retirement age;
    5) to give final decision on appeals lodged, in accordance with the law, by employees of the Federal civil service;
    6) to issue detailed directives relating to the performance evaluation of employees of the federal civil service and supervise the implementation of same;
    7) in cooperation with the concerned organs, to review existing organizational structure and manpower utilization of the Federal civil service and submit recommendations on its improvement and, upon ap- proval, ensure the implementation of same;
    8) to keep a register of the details of employees of the Federal civil service; compile data concerning all civil service employees within the country;
    9) to give assistance and advice to Regional Governments with regard to civil service structuring and adminis- tration;
    10) to own property, enter into contracts, sue and be sued in its own name;
    11) to perform such other duties as are conducive to the attainment of its objective.

#### 6. Organization of the Commission

The Commission shall have:

    1) a Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner appointed by the government, and
    2) the necessary staff.

#### 7. Powers and duties of the Commissioner

    1) The Commissioner shall be the chief executive of the Commission and, as such, shall direct and administer the activities of the commission.
    2) Without limiting the generality stated in sub-Article (1) of this Article, the commissioner shall:
        (a) exercise the powers and duties of the Commission specified in Article 5 of this Proclamation;
        (b) employ and administer employees of the Commis- sion in accordance with the Federal civil service laws;
        (c) prepare the work programme and budget of the Commission and implement same upon approval;
        (d) effect expenditure in accordance with the approved budget and work programme of the Commission;
        (e) represent the Commission in all its dealings with third parties;
        (f) submit reports on the activities of the Commission.
    3) The Commissioner may delegate part of his powers and duties to the other officials and to employees of the Commission to the extent necessary for the efficiency of the Commission.

#### 8. Budget

The budget of the Commission shall be allocated by the Government.

#### 9. Books of Accounts

    1) The commission shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts.
    2) The Commission's books of accounts and financial documents shall be audited annually by the Auditor General or by auditors designated by him.

#### 10. Transfer of Rights and Obligations

The rights and obligations of the Public Servants' Administration Commission are hereby transferred to the Commission.

#### 11. Effective Date

This Proclamation shall enter into force as of the 24th day of August, 1995.

**Done at Addis Ababa, this 24th day of August, 1995.**

> ##### NEGASO GIDADA (DR.)
>
> ##### PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPΡΙΑ